Embeddedness, cooperation and popular-economy firms in the informal sector Abstract .This paper is motivated by empirical observations on popular-economy firms PEFs in .the informal sector of Santiago de Chile. These are labor-managed firms LMFs embedded in a ‘popular milieu’ where cooperation between their members plays a central role. This .paper develops a partial equilibrium microeconomic theory of PEFs. Endogeneizing the level of cooperation between the workers, the paper develops a static and a dynamic model to analyze whether embeddedness influences the behavior of the PEF. Embeddedness is assumed to be captured by three different characteristics suggested by the empirical observations. Most of them influence the employment and income levels in the PEF.
Keywords: Embeddedness; Cooperation; Labor-managed firms; Popular-economy firm 1. Introduction It is admitted today that subsistence in the poor areas of Third World cities is possible, partly, thanks to the development of a wide range of small economic .activities created by the people themselves retail shops, craftsmen, services, etc.
 outside formal economic channels. This phenomenon has been referred to in recent economic and sociological writings as ‘informal sector’, ‘underground economy’ or ‘survival strategies’. This informal sector is clearly inserted in a popular milieu .in Chile, ‘poblaciones’; in Argentina, ‘ villas miseria’; in Brazil, ‘favelas’ .
Following an inductive approach, some authors have argued that more considera- tion should be given to the embeddedness of these ‘informal’ economic activities in their social, political, economic and cultural reality (Dia, 1991; Hugon, 1996; .Rogaly, 1997). Like these authors, we are concerned with the question: Does it matter whether the ‘informal sector’ is embedded in a popular milieu? However, our approach is quite different. Starting from ‘stylized facts’, we develop a microeconomic model to derive the possible implications of embeddedness. No attempt is made to answer such a broad question comprehensively. First, we only consider some aspects of embeddedness. Second, we only deal with a specific .segment of the ‘informal sector’, namely, ‘popular-economy firms’ PEFs . These . .are small groups of workers organized as labor-managed firms LMFs .
This paper first argues that the ‘environment’ in which an organization is embedded can influence the type of information agents have and can explain the existence of social norms. Then, we summarize the relevant information available in a survey on PEFs in Santiago de Chile and in a larger survey about ‘popular- economy initiatives’ in the same area. Some ‘stylized facts’ emerge about the organizational structure of PEFs ownership, income inequalities, degree of coop- .eration between workers, etc. and about the link between these firms and local social networks. The rest of the paper develops a microeconomic theory of PEFs.
The models are based on assumptions motivated by these stylized facts. From these, it is clearly not possible to derive a unique and non-controversial set of attributes characterizing embeddedness in a popular milieu. Yet, these surveys suggest various plausible assumptions about these attributes, whose consequences on the behavior of the firm seem worthwhile to analyze. Although our analysis is limited to the embeddedness of LMFs in a popular milieu and is developed at a partial equilibrium level only, we hope to contribute to the debate about the possible importance of embeddedness.
This paper develops both a static and a dynamic model. In the static setting, we start from the literature on the LMF where the incumbent workers’ utility is maximized taking into account the risk of a lay-off the so-called ‘ex-ante . 1 .egalitarian cooperative’ . As in Spinnewyn and Svejnar 1990 and Georges .1994 , we take advantage of the close connection between the modeling of the LMF and the search for efficient contracts in unionized profit-maximizing firms .PMFs . The static model extends this literature in two directions. First, it endogeneizes the level of cooperation between the members and the workers 1 . . .See among others: Steinherr and Thisse 1979 , Brewer and Browning 1982 , Bonin 1984 , . .Kahana and Nitzan 1989; 1993 and Spinnewyn and Svejnar 1990 .
 177 entering the LMF. This extension is motivated by the observation that experienced workers play an active role in the training of recruits. The model shows that the degree of cooperation between members and newcomers is much higher in such an organization than in a PMF with so-called ‘insiders’. Second, we introduce two possible dimensions of embeddedness to see whether it influences the behavior of the firm. Assuming that the hypothesis of symmetric information is more plausible in a dense social network than otherwise, we show that the risk of a lay-off would be efficiently shared between the members of a PEF. This implies a lower level of employment than in the case of an inefficient risk-sharing. Next, starting from the observation that earnings differentials are much lower in PEFs, we postulate that incumbent and entrant workers should be equally paid and analyze the behavior of the PEF under this constraint. Compared to the case where entrants are paid their reservation wage, the employment level is as expected lower.
In a dynamic model, we analyze possible consequences of embeddedness on membership formation. The surveys point to the existence of close links between the PEF and a preexisting community andror a local group. Therefore, we assume that the initial number of members is concerned with the stream of income but also with the time path of employment and membership levels. In steady state, it is shown that all members are employed, some new workers are hired to replace quits and are immediately considered as members. Moreover, in steady state, the marginal effect of employment on income per worker is negative. This solution therefore lies between the employment level that maximizes value-added per .worker see, e.g., Vanek, 1970 and the extreme case where the employment level .is maximized Kahana and Nitzan, 1989 . The dynamic behavior of the PEF is also studied.
The literature has since a long time been concerned with the so-called ‘perverse response’ of the LMF according to which output and labor demand are inversely .related to the output price . This paper shows that the this ‘perverse response’ is not systematically observed.
This paper is organized in the following way. Section 2 develops the concept of embeddedness. Section 3 summarizes the empirical observations on PEFs. Section 4 deals with the static model and Section 5 with its dynamic extension. Section 6 summarizes the paper and concludes.
2. Popular economy, popular-economy firms and embeddedness The informal sector is a growing reality in Third World cities. For some, this informal sector is the manifestation of a universal tendency towards entrepreneur- .ship, of a kind of ‘barefoot capitalism’ De Soto, 1987 . For others, these economic activities are archaic and therefore have to disappear over time or are, at .best, in need of transformation Tokman, 1990 . Recent studies in economic microorganizations of Third World countries highlight the fact that more consider- 178 ation must be given to the ‘embeddedness’ of these economic activities in their social, political, economic and cultural reality Dia, 1991; Hugon, 1996; Rogaly, .1997 . This means that in order to understand these diverse informal forms of economic activity, one must refer to the social structures and the relational .networks with which they interact Polanyi, 1944; Granovetter, 1985 . Economic organizations are constructed by individuals whose actions are influenced, i.e., both facilitated and constrained, by the structures and resources 2 available in the .social environment in which they are embedded Granovetter, 1992 .
Therefore, beyond their heterogeneity, the informal economic activities share the context in which they are embedded, the popular milieu. This milieu is made up of all the inhabitants of peripheral urban areas who, mostly under precarious economic conditions, develop relationships and modes of conduct in reference to that space. Sociological studies show that despite the heterogeneity of the popula- tion in these peripheral quarters, these areas have become a genuine identificatory .reference Salazar, 1991 . For this reason, the expression ‘popular economy’ is being increasingly adopted in order to highlight the usually neglected embedded- .ness of these organizations Nyssens, 1994, 1997 . The popular economy is therefore the set of different activities developed by the popular sectors to ensure .their subsistence and satisfy their economic needs Razeto, 1991 .
.Razeto proposes two criteria to classify these activities see Table 1 . On the one hand, there are several different forms of organization: popular-economy .organizations PEOs , family businesses, individual initiatives, etc. For Razeto .1991 , .Popular-economy organizations PEOs are groups of people in a given neigh- borhood organized to seek out ways of resolving in solidarity the members’ needs in the areas of consumption, production and the distribution of goods and .services p. 84 .
On the other hand, within each of these modes of organization, there are several strongly differentiated levels of development, ranging from survival-oriented activities to activities witnessing substantial growth. Table 1 presents such a classification. To provide more intuition, each cell of the table contains an example.
Embedding a socio-economic organization in its social and cultural environ- ment is to a large extent only useful if this provides a better understanding of its functioning. This paper argues that it often does. To develop a rigorous argumenta- 2 Resources are the means available in the environment for the setting of an economic activity: human and material capital but also ‘social’ capital networks of social relations, trust, social norms, . .etc. . See Harriss and De Renzio 1997 .
 179 Table 1 .Structure of popular economy: classification and examples source: Razeto and Calcagni, 1989 PEOs Family businesses Informal individual Charitable initiatives Illegal activities initiatives Life strategies Self-managed workshops Productive workshops Taxi drivers Housing organizations Drug smuggling Subsistence strategies Food buyers’ groups Small retail stores Small repairs Beneficiaries of Clandest. alcohol selling charity institutions Survival strategies Soup kitchens Junk collection and resale Street vendors Begging Small thefts 180 tion, we focus on a specific segment of the popular economy, namely, the PEOs involved in production, called PEFs.
A preliminary step is to specify how an economic model could deal with embeddedness. First, the relational networks in which the organization is located can influence the information available to the agents. The kind of assumption .made symmetric vs. asymmetric information, type of asymmetry can reflect the social and cultural context in which the organization is embedded.
Introducing the influence of norms into agents’ behavior is a second way of modeling the embeddedness of economic organizations. Norms are a set of rules .legal, social, moral, etc. shared by a group of people. They influence the choices made by the individual members of this group. Norms emerge over time in a given social, political, economic and cultural reality. 3 Norms can impose a constraint on the agents’ choices. The equality of wages between incumbent and entrant .workers the refusal of two-tier contracts may be viewed as the consequence of a .social norm of fairness Elster, 1989; Fehr and Kirchsteiger, 1994 . Introducing endogenous Õariables capturing a collective component is another approach.
.Simon 1993 argues that embeddedness in social networks provides perhaps the most important rationale for introducing non-economic variables into objective functions, especially variables reflecting some kind of altruism. For example, .within the theory of the LMF, Kahana and Nitzan 1989 have given reasons why the level of employment could have a positive effect on the utility of the incumbent workers. We shall explore some of these paths in Sections 4 and 5.
( )3. PEFs in Santiago Chile : some basic facts This section is based on two sets of data collected in the Santiago metropolitan area: A random sample survey of 50 PEFs, out of a population of 1000 PEFs .supported by the Program of Labor Economics in 1993 Larraechea, 1994 , and a survey on more than 4000 popular-economy initiatives PEOs, family businesses, .individual initiatives, etc. supported by a group of non-governmental organiza- . .tions NGOs in 1991 PET, 1992 . While the second sample covers a wide range of economic initiatives and organizations, the former is only concerned with a subset of the latter population, namely PEOs involved in production see Section .2 . Therefore, by definition, the first sample does not include family firms and individual initiatives. So, the first sample is directly relevant for our purpose.
3 Various streams of economics have studied the influence of norms. For the economists of .conventions see, e.g., Dupuy et al., 1989 , norms take the form of ‘conventions’, i.e., regularities which flow from social interactions but appear to the actors in the form of an unquestionable constraint.
.For the ‘new institutional economics’ see, e.g., Williamson, 1985; North, 1986 , norms are an agent’s efficient answer to the problem of transaction costs in a context of imperfect information. A lot of . .arguments have been raised against this view. Authors like Elster 1989 or Granovetter 1992 have indeed argued that norms are not outcome-oriented.
 181 Table 2 .Distribution of initiatives by member status source: PET, 1992; sample sizes1854 Type of relationship between members % Initiatives Communitarian 39.9 Associative 17.8 Family 33.8 Employer–employee 5.0 Others 3.5 Total 100 However, as will soon be clear, some useful information is only available for the larger group of popular-economy initiatives. Our presentation starts with the latter.
The PET survey on popular-economy initiatives confirms that the popular economy is made of heterogeneous types of organization. Table 2 displays the type of links between individuals involved in these initiatives. Thirty-four percent of these initiatives are family microenterprises and 5% are employer–employee relationships. Fifty-eight percent of the initiatives should be considered as PEOs since both communitarian and associative links refer to initiatives organized by groups which seek out ways of resolving in solidarity the members’ needs. In this table, ‘communitarian’ means that there are strong links among members before specific economic initiatives are undertaken. Table 3 describes how the surplus, i.e., the residual, return is distributed. This surplus accrues much less often to the owners of capital than to families or workers. Cases where the surplus accrues to workers are compatible with either family firms or PEOs.
.The survey of Larraechea 1994 gives information on PEFs. Only 11% of the sampled workers declare that they are in an employer–employee relation. Eighty- five percent think that they are ‘members’ of an enterprise owned by the workers themselves. This information motivates our interpretation of PEFs as LMFs inserted in the popular economy. Furthermore, between 80% and 90% of those Table 3 Initiatives distribution by surplus affectation source: Program of Labor Economics, PET, 1992; sample .sizes1218 Surplus affectation % Initiatives To capital owners 8.6 To workers as a function of individual contributions 27.4 To workers as a function of needs 13.1 Egalitarian distribution among workers 21.1 Integrated into family budget 18.1 Investment in the firm 5.7 Others 6.0 Total 100.0 182 interviewed answer that they are involved in decisions such as the choice of the production process, the choice of products or the levels of prices and output.
Eighty-seven percent of their workers evaluated the state of cooperation between 4 .workers to be ‘good’ of ‘ very good’. In Larraechea 1994 , there is no information about the level of PEFs investment in training. However, a large majority of members answer that working with experienced colleagues was the most important way to acquire the appropriate skills. This favors the assumption that experienced workers play a crucial role in enhancing the productivity of entrants. What is the level of development of these PEFs? The average size of PEFs was six workers and the average age was 9 years. Furthermore, the mean of a PEF worker’s monthly income was US$341. This is relatively high compared to the alternatives available to workers in the ‘formal’ economy. This income level corresponds to the earnings of an employee with a post-high school degree, while only 33% of the workers in the sample actually reached this education level. This income is a bit lower than that of a technician in the formal sector, while most of the PEF members could only apply for a blue-collar job. These income levels suggest that we cannot view all the PEFs as transitory and survival strategies. The survey also shows that income differentials are twice lower in PEFs than in PMFs in the Santiago area. 5 As far as embeddedness is concerned, the surveys provide some interesting information about the type of interactions between these grass-roots economic organizations and the social structures or relational networks. First, considering the communitarian and associative initiatives in Table 2, it turns out that more than two-thirds of these PEOs grew out of community circles such as grass-roots church communities, political or cooperative movements. Sociological studies show how these popular movements have contributed to the development of a .strong identity see, e.g., Aman and Parker, 1991 . The history of cooperative 6 movements such as the Mondragon system in Spain, the Third Italy and the 7 .Dinesh Beedi industrial cooperative in Kerala shows that a collective identity linked to social movements has been important for their development. Second, the .survey of PET 1992 shows that almost all the PEOs participate in committees or leagues dealing with the exchange of information, training programs, the purchase of raw material, marketing, etc. In the 1992 survey, one counts 108 of such overarching leagues. Finally, in the Larraechea’s survey on PEFs, there is some evidence about the motivations of the firm to contract a new worker which indirectly reveals their degree of embeddedness. For 64% of the firms, economic considerations are relevant. Yet, 31% of the PEFs underlie motivations of solidar- 4 Six percent evaluate it to be average, 2% bad or very bad and 4% did not contest the question.
5 .Other analyses of various samples of LMFs reach the same conclusion ity to create a job for an unemployed person or ideological motivations to .contract a worker who shares the same values .
To sum up, these observations suggest a set of assumptions on which a theory of the PEF can be founded. The PEF should be viewed as a LMF. Experienced workers play a crucial role in the transmission of skills to the entrants. Embedded- ness in local networks could be reflected in various stylized ways. It can be argued that the assumption of symmetric information is plausible since typically the PEF is so closely connected to preexisting groups. For the same reason, it is also plausible that issues such as the time profile of the size of the PEF or the rules governing membership formation matters for the current members of a PEF.
Finally, the relatively weak income inequality within PEFs should also be taken into account in our theory.
Although these assumptions are only suggested by the available information, it seems worthwhile to analyze their implications at a theoretical level and to .confront them with alternative assumptions to see whether embeddedness matters .
Sections 4 and 5 develop this analysis.
4. A static model of the PEF 4.1. Assumptions and notations .Let y s y , . . . , y be the vector of outputs and non-labor inputs of a LMF1 G .y is positive in the case of an output and negative in the case of an input . Let LG be homogeneous labor measured in efficiency units. The feasible production set is denoted by Y ; R Gq 1 . We assume that the LMF faces given output and input .prices, p s p , . . . , p . Whatever the value of L, the LMF is assumed to1 G maximize value-added f L s Max py T 1. .
.yg y , L gY By assumption, for a given L, the corresponding subset of Y is compact.
.Hence, problem 1 has a solution. If this subset varies continuously with L, so . .does f L . We assume that Y is convex, so that f L is concave.
We assume that the number of hours each laborer works is identical and fixed .after normalization to 1. In addition, as in Lindbeck and Snower 1988 , we .distinguish the number of employed members ‘insiders’ or ‘incumbent workers’ , L , and the number of entrants, L , where entrants are ‘outsiders’ who enter thei e firm. The number of employed insiders, L , has to be lower or equal to the initiali number n of incumbent workers. In this section, n is exogenous this assumption .is relaxed in Section 4.2 . We assume that there is no upper bound on the number of entrants, L . Let a and a be endogenous parameters that transform a givene i e number of workers into a quantity of labor input measured in efficiency units.
184 Hence, Eq. We assume that a and a are non-negative and bounded. .from above say, a F 1, a F 1 . As in Lindbeck and Snower 1988 , a and ai e i e can be seen as the level of cooperation respectively between insiders and between .insiders and entrants. As in Lindbeck and Snower 1988 , insiders, the ‘experi- enced’ workers, are the only ones who are able to engage in cooperation activities.
Therefore, it is assumed that both a and a are under the control of the incumbenti e workers. These workers can incur a disutility from their cooperation activities with .entrants. This approach is not developed in this paper but well in Nyssens, 1994 .
In this paper, for expository reasons, we simply assume that these cooperation activities involve a cost of training which is proportional to the number of entrants and to the degree of cooperation a . In this way, cooperating with entrants is seene as creating a loss of value added. As will soon be clear, this approach leads to easily interpretable results. To simplify the exposition, cooperation between insiders is costless. Hence, a s 1.i .If employed, the incumbent workers’ income is C . Their utility is U C . We1 1 assume UX ) 0 and UY - 0. If fired, incumbent workers are assumed to work in another firm, where they earn an exogenous wage w. w is assumed to be lower .than the maximum possible value-added per worker, i.e., max f L rL. ThisL .assumption is compatible with the results of Larraechea 1994 mentioned in Section 3. 8 We assume that workers have no access to financial markets. Hence, risk-averse workers prefer a labor contract that insure them against income fluctuation. In a context of symmetric information about this assumption, see .Section 3 , we will consider the possibility that the LMF pays a compensation C2 to laid-off insiders. The results with and without this compensation will be contrasted. The possibility of an insurance mechanism establishes a link between .our model and the implicit contract approach see Rosen, 1985, for a survey . One difference should nevertheless be emphasized, namely, that we envisage risk-shar- ing between employed and laid-off insiders for a giÕen ‘state of the world’, i.e., for a given function f. Put differently, the LMF faces a budget constraint conditional on the realization of f. 9 Let C denote the compensation paid toe .entrants C s w .e .In a seminal paper, Law 1977 assumed that the number of employed as well as income per worker enter the objective function of a LMF. Along the same lines, .Steinherr and Thisse 1979 and several more recent papers assume that the 8 Moreover, w is not a function of a . This means that cooperation between insiders and entrantse yields firm-specific skills.
9 Due to a limited access to financial markets, the PEF cannot diversify risks. This model differs .from the one of McCain 1985 in three ways. First, McCain considers the ex-ante problem of a LMF facing a distribution of ‘states of the world’. Put another way, his function f is state-contingent as in the standard implicit contract literature. Second, McCain rules out any risk-sharing between employed and laid-off insiders. Third, he endogeneizes the number n of members in a static setting in Section 5, .we deal with this issue in a dynamic one .
 185 probability of being laid-off is the same for each worker. Therefore, it is rational to assume that the LMF maximizes the expected utility of a representative member. As long as the initial number of insiders, n, is exogenous, the maximiza- tion of a utilitarian objective is strictly equivalent to the latter. In this paper, the LMF is endowed with a utilitarian objective function: Eq. This objective function clearly introduces a trade-off between the income and employment levels.
This objective is maximized under a set of constraints. In addition to the ones already mentioned, one constraint says that earnings and compensations paid cannot exceed the value-added generated by the production activities minus the loss due to cooperation: Eq. where k is the constant non-negative marginal cost of cooperation. This constraint will always be binding. It can be seen as a zero-iso-profit function. Therefore, our problem can be reinterpreted as the search for an efficient contract in a unionized PMF where profits are fixed to zero. 10 4.2. The model The problem of the PEF can be formulated as follows: Eq. The first-order conditions of this problem are presented in Appendix A. To analyze these conditions, we first assume that n is large enough, so that maintaining a job for each insider is not desirable given that C must be higher than or1 .equal to w . In that case, whatever the value of a there will be no entrants sincee hiring outsiders implies a cooperation cost. The case with and without lay-off payments will be contrasted. We will next consider a small enough membership n, . .where hiring outsiders will be optimal. The models 2 – 6 imply immediately that 10 .The connection between LMF and unionized PMF was first highlighted by Law 1977 .
186 C s w. We deal with this case but also with one of the egalitarian PEF where ane additional constraint, C s C , applies as a consequence of a social norm. Between1 e these high and low values of n, a third region will appear where all insiders keep their job and no outsider enters the firm. This decomposition in three regions is .also present in the modeling of LMFs in Spinnewyn and Svejnar 1990 . It is a standard result in PMFs, too see, e.g., Carruth and Oswald, 1987; Lindbeck and .Snower, 1988 .
4.2.1. The case where some insiders are laid-off For sufficiently large values of n, we know that at the optimum, some incumbent workers will be fired and no outsider will enter the firm. Appendix A shows that at the optimum C s C q w. Therefore, the utility level of employed1 2 insiders equals the one of the laid-off ones this is the case of the ex-post . 11 X .egalitarian LMF . It follows that f L s w. This means that the utilization ofi labor is efficient. Furthermore, the level of C is given by: Eq..2 which is positive. 12 Hence, C ) w.1 X .The properties C s C q w and f L s w are also found in the implicit1 2 i .contract theory literature under symmetric information see Rosen, 1985 where risks are efficiently shared between a private firm and a pool of risk averse workers endowed with a utility function equivalent to the one assumed here. Yet, the assumption of symmetric information looks more plausible in a LMF embed- ded in dense social networks than in other types of firms.
. X .The optimal solution 7 , C s C q w, f L s w, L s 0 is found as long as1 2 i e n sGf Xy1 . In Fig. 1, this boundary value is denoted by n and A is the optimalA solution.
.If, for whatever reason, laid-off insiders cannot be compensated C s 0 , one2 . .easily derives the following equality from Eqs. A1 and A2 in Appendix 1 .which simply says that C , L is on the contract curve. This curve has the same1 i .interpretation as in McDonald and Solow 1981 . It is the set of tangency points between iso-utility and iso-profit curves. When C is fixed to zero, the contract2 11 It should be noticed that less simple conclusions would be reached in the case of a more general .utility function see Rosen, 1985, in a related context .
12 This is true because f is concave and w is assumed to be lower than the maximum possible Xy 1. .value-added per worker. These hypotheses imply that the point f w , w is on the right of the .maximum of the value-added per worker function. In that region, it can be easily seen that Eq. 7 is positive.
 187 Fig. 1. The static model.
X . .curve starts at the competitive equilibrium f L s w and is upward slopingi X . .see the curve CC in Fig. 1 . The optimal C , L is at the intersection of the1 i . .contract curve and the budget constraint 2 which here becomes Eq. This solution is indicated by point B in Fig. 1. It is the optimal one as long as n ) n in Fig. 1. As can be seen from this figure, the employment level is lowerB when C is positive: n - n . If compensating laid-off insiders is impossible, the2 A B only way risk averse workers can partially insure against the utility loss of lay-off is by hiring a number of incumbent workers in excess to what would be efficient .on this issue, see also Rosen, 1985 . It is immediately seen that risk averse .insiders prefer that ex-post utility be completely insured by the PEF C ) 0 .2 4.2.2. The case where outsiders are hired If the number of entrants, L , is positive, all insiders are necessarily employede .L s n . In addition, the marginal cost of hiring an outsider must be equal to itsi marginal productivity: Eq. where C s w. The latter is only positive if a , the degree of cooperation withe e entrants, is itself positive. However, if L is positive, cooperation has to bee .maximal a s 1 , a result in sharp contrast with the optimal behavior in PMFse with insiders where the optimal value of a is its lower bound, see Lindbeck ande 188 . 13 Snower, 1988 . This result is shown in Appendix A and is compatible with .empirical observations see Section 3 .
.The number of entrants, L , is given by Eq. 9 where a s 1. The total numbere e of workers is denoted by n in Fig. 1, of which n y n are entrant workers. TheC C .insiders wage is determined by the budget constraint 2 : where the bracketed difference is positive 14 and therefore C ) w q k. In this1 case, the PEF implements a two-tier system where outsiders earn their reservation .wage w and insiders benefit from a higher income defined by Eq. 10 . The . X .optimal solution defined by Eq. 10 ,  is observed for all n lower than n .C The literature on union–firm bargaining has argued that two-tier systems are not often observed. This sounds even more plausible in the case of a PEF see .Section 3 . It is therefore necessary to consider another reference case where a strict equality between C and C is imposed. Under this hypothesis, the budget1 e constraint can be rewritten as: f n q L y kL.e e C s . 11.1 n q Le .This expression can be substituted in Eq. 9 , taking into account that a s 1 ande C s C . Carrying out the calculations yields:e 1 f n q L kn.eX f n q L y s , 12. .e n q L n q Le e .which is an implicit equation in L . Should k be zero, the solution to Eq. 12e would simply be the employment level that maximizes value-added per worker .point E in Fig. 1 , i.e., the optimum found in the first generation of literature on .LMFs see, e.g., Vanek, 1970 .
.Let n be the solution to Eq. 12 for L equal to zero, i.e., let n be theD e D solution to: f X . For all n lower than n , at the optimum, L s n, L solves Eq.. Given that w is assumed to be lower1 e e e 1 .than the maximum of , it is clear that C is higher than w for sufficiently1 low values of k.
13 An interior solution could be found if the cost of cooperation was not proportional to the product a L . This result would still be at variance with the one obtained in the model of a PMF developed bye e .Lindbeck and Snower 1988 .
14 . .Because f is concave, this is true if , i.e., for sufficiently low values of k.
 189 4.2.3. The intermediate case Between the boundaries n or n and n or n , the number of insiders is suchD C A B that each of them is employed in the PEF. No outsider enters the firm because the marginal increase of value-added they create is insufficient to compensate the .marginal cost they impose to the PEF. Hence, C s f n rn. Clearly, the range of1 values of n where this outcome is observed varies according to the assumptions made a two-tier system or an egalitarian wage system where insiders and entrants are equally paid; the presence or the absence of a compensation to laid-off .insiders .
Up to now, the possible consequences of embeddedness have been developed along two directions. First, embeddedness matters if, because it is located in a dense social network, information is symmetric and a PEF can insure laid-off insiders while another firm cannot. 15 If this condition is verified, everything else equal, the income of the laid-off workers will be higher and the employment level will be lower in the PEF. Second, if a dense social network favors income equality .between insiders and entrants, the total level of employment insidersq entrants will be lower in a PEF compared to another LMF. This assertion holds if two-tier systems are implemented in the latter organization.
Before we envisage other dimensions of embeddedness in a dynamic setting, we show in Appendix B that in many cases the PEF does not develop the so-called perverse response property which has long since worried the literature on LMFs.
This perverse response is only observed in the case where n - n , insiders andD entrants are equally paid and the marginal cost of cooperation, k, is sufficiently low.
5. A dynamic model of the PEF 5.1. Assumptions and notations This section endogeneizes the number of members of the PEF, n. The appropriate setting to deal with this question is clearly dynamic. We are interested in the optimal path and steady state properties. Previous intertemporal models maximize the present value of income per worker see Naslund, 1988; Caputo,¨ .1992; Georges, 1994 . Consequently, they ignore risk aversion and the possibility of lay-offs. Therefore, in these papers, the employment level only influences preferences through its effect on income per worker. To avoid these limitations, 15 Instead of opposing the case with lay-off payments under symmetric information and the case without such compensation, we could have compared the former and the case with lay-off payments but asymmetric information. The basic conclusion that income and the allocation of labor are different would have typically been unchanged see Rosen, 1985 or Blanchard and Fischer, 1989, in the context .of PMFs .
190 .this section assumes a utilitarian LMF as in the static model . In each period t, the firm is concerned with the well-founded following objective:
Due to space limitation, we cannot consider each of the hypotheses made in Section 4. We assume that laid-off insiders, if any, do not receive a compensation .and we rule out two-tier wage systems C t is the compensation paid to the .insiders instructed to work and to the entrants, if any . These assumptions make a comparison with the traditional LMF literature easier.
We consider an infinite horizon model with forward-looking agents. In a .continuous-time setting, the instantaneous objective 13 is integrated over a w  .period 0,q `. This means that the initial number of insiders n 0 is concerned .with the stream of income C t but also with the time path of the insiders’ . . .employment and membership levels L t and n t , respectively . The samei assumption has sometimes been made for unions see Jones, 1987; Kidd and .Oswald, 1987; Jones and McKenna, 1994 . Yet, it seems more plausible in the case of an embedded PEF, where the links with a preexisting community andror a . .local group appear very often see Section 3 . Notice that Eq. 13 becomes .Therefore, if all members are employed, the marginali rate of substitution of consumption for membership along an instantaneous . X .indifference curve is given by Ur nU . Thus, the PEF is ready to trade a decrease in consumption for a higher number of members and vice versa.
.Conditional on n 0 , the PEF chooses a time path for the numbers of insiders and entrants and for the cooperation level between insiders and entrants, a . Thee .number of members, n t , is the state variable. Its level is influenced by a fourth control variable which measures the share of the laid-off insiders respectively, of . the entrants who loose their membership respectively, become a member of the .PEF . More specifically, we assume that the equation of motion for the state .variable i.e., the membership formation rule may be written as:
where m t is a control variable and q is an exogenous and constant quit rate capturing relevant aspects in a dynamic setting such as mortality, migration or 16 . .retirement 0 - q - 1 . The first expression on the right-hand side of Eq. 14 means that the number of members decreases because of quits. The second expression captures the influence of lay-offs and recruitments on membership. The 16 This quit rate is not endogeneized here since this analysis does not focus on the determinants of the underlying phenomena.
 191 . .expression between braces is either negative in case of lay-offs i.e., if Eq.. These flows aree i e .multiplied by the control m t . This implies that the level of entries and exits is fixed by the PEF according to its own objective function. 17 5.2. The model The LMF in the present model solves the following dynamic problem: Eq. .where n is a given positive constant, r is the discount rate and f P is defined by0 . .Eq. 1 . Any solution to Eq. 15 should meet the additional constraint C s w. To simplify the exposition, we shall not impose this inequality which adds little insight to this analysis.
The current-value Hamiltonian H and Lagrangian L associated with problem .15 are Eq. being time-dependent multipliers defined on R . The first-orderq conditions for maximizing L are presented in Appendix C. Various properties are 17 It is implicitly assumed that in each period entrants are actually newcomers who needs some costly cooperation from the insiders in order to become productive. Furthermore, it is implicitly assumed that . .an entrant agrees to become a member if m t )0. As long as C t ) w, this is certainly the case for it will turn out that nobody is fired along the path towards the steady state as soon as outsiders enter the PEF.
192 easily derived from these conditions. First, as in the static case, outsiders enter the firm if and only if all insiders are employed. Moreover, when outsiders enter the firm, the cooperation level, a , is equal to its upper bound the proof of Appendixe .A is still valid here . Finally, the Lagrangian is linear in m. Therefore, Eq. Properties in steady state Before we consider the dynamic behavior of the system, let us look at the .steady state conditions. The n s 0 condition implies that. It is obvious that m cannot be zero. Hence, Therefore, Eq., which implies a contradiction, namely, thati n - L . Consequently, L s n G 0. The n s 0 condition becomes then mL s qn,˙i i e which only makes sense if m s 1. Therefore, an entrant who is hired becomes immediately a member. To sum up, in steady state, L s n and L s qn. 17.i e In steady state, all insiders are employed and some outsiders are recruited to replace those who quit. The conclusion is therefore that only one of the three regimes found in the static model can be a steady state in a model with quits. 19 From this property and the optimality conditions, Appendix C shows that the optimal size of membership, n, is such that the marginal increase in the current .. X .. .objective of the PEF , is equal to its1 future discounted effect more members implying more quits and, hence, more .entrants . After some manipulation, this condition can be rewritten as:
The left-hand side of Eq.  .negative and is simply minus the marginal rate of substitution of consumption .for membership along an instantaneous indifference curve evaluated at the steady .state. In the particular case where cooperation is costless k s 0 , the right-hand .side of Eq. 18 has a straightforward interpretation. It is simply proportional to the marginal increase in income per worker as membership increases. 20 So, Eq.
18 An interior solution would become possible if the cost of training per new member was a function of the number who must be trained at any one point in time.
19 .For the equivalent result in a PMF, see Huizinga and Schiantarelli 1992 . If we take the limiting and less realistic case of no quits, the full range of equilibria found in the static case are steady states of the model.
20 The multiplier 1q r q q has the following origin. A higher number of members today implies more quits and, hence, additional entrants in the future.
 193 . .18 implies that in steady state the employment level i.e., members plus entrants is such that this marginal increase in income is negative. This property derives from the preferences of the LMF where the path of employment matters. In general, i.e., when k ) 0, the marginal increase in income per worker is reduced because enlarging membership involves a cooperation cost.
. .The steady state defined by Eqs. 17 and 18 is apparently similar to point B . .in Fig. 1 Eq. 8 of the static model . For, in both cases, the outcome is defined by the tangency point between a downward-sloping ‘iso-preference’ curve and the .value-added per head curve corrected for the cooperation cost . However, the two solutions are genuinely different. In point B, conditional on n, some insiders are fired and for this very reason employment matters for the utilitarian PEF. Here, all insiders are employed, some outsiders are hired to replace quits and the employ- ment level of insiders can matter to the utilitarian PEF because membership is now endogenous.
In the second part of Appendix B, the so-called ‘perverse response’ of LMFs is reconsidered in the steady state. It is shown that the ‘perverse response’ is not a general result. To see this intuitively, assume that k s 0. As the output price increases, value-added per head, f, shifts upwards and becomes steeper in the neighborhood of the steady state. Contrary to the LMF maximizing value-added per head, this does not lead here to a negative effect on membership employ- . . ..ment if the instantaneous iso-utility of the PEF, ‘n t U C t s constant’, is sufficiently concave. This condition expresses that the marginal rate of substitution of consumption for membership sufficiently increases with consumption.
5.4. Dynamic analysis around the steady state It has been shown above that only one of the three regimes found in the static model can be a steady state in the dynamic setting namely, the regime where all .insiders are occupied and outsiders enter the firm to replace quits . As far as the dynamic behavior of the system is concerned, three cases should be distinguished according to the starting situation the initial number of insiders is large, low or .intermediate as in Section 4 . We here only focus on the dynamic behavior of the . . . .system in the neighborhood of a steady state where L t s n t and L t G 0 .i e .Moreover, to simplify the analysis, we ignore cooperation costs k s 0 . Appendix .C linearizes the equation of motion for the costate variable g t . Fig. 2 gives the phase diagram corresponding to this linearized equation and the equation of ˙. . .motion 14 . The n t s 0 locus is upward-sloping and the L t s 0 locus is˙ e downward-sloping. The arrows indicate directions of motion. There is locally a unique saddle point path SS converging to the steady state. The dynamics of employment are implied by the path SS. Assume an initial level of membership . .such that all insiders are occupied, n 0 in Fig. 2. The initial value of L , L 0 , ise e read off SS. As m s 1 in a neighborhood of the steady state, these entrants 194 Fig. 2. Dynamics of membership and employment of outsiders.
.become members. So, n t starts increasing and the number of entrants becomes lower until the steady state is reached. There, the number of entrants is just enough to compensate quits.
.Fig. 3 illustrates the adjustment process after a small unanticipated permanent rise in the output price. Let us focus on the case where this rise increases ˙.employment. The n t s 0 locus is not affected and the L locus shifts to the right.˙ e . .In Fig. 3, the new saddle point path is SS. The initial equilibrium is n, L s N,l .e . X .The path of adjustment is composed of a jump at time 0 from N,l to N,l and a Y Y .movement over time from this point to the new steady state N ,l . The initial rise in employment is made of entrants who become members, so that eventually Y .the number of insiders is higher N ) N . So does the number of entrants Y .l ) l .
To sum up, in this dynamic setting, the possible consequences of embeddedness have been developed by endogeneizing membership formation. Since the links between the PEF and a preexisting community andror a local group appears very . .often see Section 3 , we have assumed that the initial number of insiders n 0 is concerned with the stream of income but also with the time path of the insiders’ employment and membership levels. In steady state, it is shown that all insiders are employed, some outsiders are hired to replace quits and membership adjusts immediately. The chosen objective function is such that in steady state the marginal effect of employment on income per worker is negative. This solution  195 .Fig. 3. The effect of an increase in output price the case without ‘perverse response’ .
therefore lies between the employment level that maximizes value-added per .worker see, e.g., Vanek, 1970 and the extreme case where the employment level .is maximized Kahana and Nitzan, 1989 . Finally, there is locally a unique saddle point path converging to the steady state.
6. Conclusion Would a better understanding of the relationship between the behavior of firms and their social and cultural environment throw light on the socio-economic performances of different regions or countries? A full answer to such a broad question is obviously beyond the scope of a single paper. Economists need tools to deal with this relationship between the behavior of economic agents and their social and cultural environment. We have argued that this environment could shape the type of information agents have and could explain the existence of social norms. So doing, we have introduced a link between this environment and concepts economists are able to manipulate. Next, we have applied these ideas to a specific case. We have considered a particular segment of the informal sector in the slums of Santiago de Chile, namely PEFs. From surveys, it turns out that these are LMFs embedded in local social networks, showing a small degree of income 196 inequality and characterized by a high level of cooperation between workers.
These ‘stylized facts’ have been used to formulate assumptions about the information set of the agents and about social norms. Finally, we have developed a partial .equilibrium microeconomic theory of the PEFs from which it can rigorously be derived whether these assumptions influence its behavior.
This analysis shows that embeddedness typically matters. First, it matters if, because it is located in a dense social network, information is symmetric and a PEF can insure laid-off insiders while another firm cannot. Under this assumption, everything else equal, the income of the laid-off workers will be higher and the employment level will be lower in the PEF. Second, if a dense social network favors income equality between insiders and entrants, the total level of employ- .ment insidersq entrants will be lower in a PEF compared to another LMF. This assertion holds if two-tier systems are implemented in the latter organization.
Third, if the links between the PEF and a preexisting community andror a local group implies that the initial number of members is concerned with the stream of income per worker but also with the time path of employment and membership levels, then the total level of employment lies between the employment level that maximizes value-added per worker and the extreme case where the employment level is maximized. An other interesting result is that the degree of cooperation with entrants is maximal in the PEF, while in PMFs, incumbent workers enhance their market power by developing the minimal level of cooperation with entrants .see Lindbeck and Snower, 1988 . Furthermore, we have checked that in a PEF an increase in the output price does not necessarily trigger the so-called ‘perverse response’.
Our analysis is limited to LMFs in a popular milieu. Nevertheless, we hope to have contributed to the debate about the possible importance of embeddedness on socio-economic organization. We suggest further analysis in two directions. First, we advocate that other dimensions of embeddedness should be studied with the standard tools of economics. The concept of ‘social capital’ is an example see .Harriss and De Renzio, 1997 . Second, appropriate data should be collected in order to test the predictions derived from this type of theoretical exercise.
Acknowledgements This research has been supported by a grant ‘‘Actions de Recherche Concertees’’´ no. 93r98-162 of the Ministery of Scientific Research of the Belgian French Speaking Community. This research is also part of a programme supported by the .Belgian Government Poles d’Attraction Inter-universitaires PAI P4r01 . An earlier version of this paper has benefited from the comments of F. Spinnewyn and J.H. Dreze. The comments of P. Dehez and two anonymous referees on this` version are gratefully acknowledged. The usual caveat applies.
 197 Appendix A . .This appendix develops the first-order conditions of problems 3 – 6 . Assum- ing L ) 0, C ) 0 and C ) 0, at an optimum there exists Eq. such that: 
The case where some insiders are laid-off .For sufficiently large values of n, at the optimum, L - n and L s 0. Eq. A2i e can be rewritten as: 
If C ) 0, Eq. A3 is equivalent to: .Hence, C. Substituting this result in Eq. A1 yields f L s w.1 2 i A.2. The case where outsiders are hired To see that a s 1 when L ) 0, we have to show that, for a given level ofe e .product a L , the cost of hiring entrants C L q ka L is decreasing when ae e e e e e e .increases. If C is exogenous C. It can easily be checked that the conclusion is the same if C s C . Notice that thee 1 level of cooperation is also maximized in PMFs where the firm chooses the level of a .e 198 Appendix B B.1. The static model The first generation of literature on LMFs shows that these firms perversely respond to price incentives, i.e., labor demand is inversely related to the price of .the output see, e.g., Ward, 1958 . To simplify the exposition, let us consider a .LMF producing a single output with two inputs only labor and capital . We shall now consider how the PEF demand for labor varies with changes in its output . .price, when other prices are held constant. For this purpose, let f L s p Q L, Ko y rK be the value-added function with p , the price of the output, K, the giveno .stock of the capital, r, the cost of the capital and Q L, K , the production function .assumed to be concave. f L is then concave.
To analyze the impact of an increase of the output price, p , on the level ofo .employment L , L , we shall successively consider each of the three casesi e introduced in Section 4. In a first step, we assume that the firm stays in the same region after the increase of the output price. We later relax this assumption.
B.1.1. The case where some insiders are laid-off If C is allowed to be positive, the number of workers is determined by i which is positive since Q is concave. If compensating laid-off insiders is impossi- ble, the optimal solution is, as shown in the core of the text, at the intersection of .the contract curve 8 and the budget constraint which can be written as . Differentiating totally these two equations yields: .The left-hand side of Eq. B1 , denoted by M below, is negative since C is1 .greater than w and U is concave by hypothesis. Substituting dC in Eq. B11 gives: 
.The left-hand side is positive since we are in the region where p Q L , K iso L i . . .lower than p Q L , K y rK rL and Q L, K is concave. The right-hand side iso i i obviously positive. Therefore, when there is no insurance mechanism, an increase in the output price leads to an increase in the number of employed insiders too.
B.1.2. The case where outsiders are hired Two cases must be considered with two-tier contracts and with an egalitarian .wage system . If two-tier contracts are allowed, the number of entrants is .determined by the equation. One can easily derive that, K which is positive since is concave. The number of entrants is then positively related to the output price.
.When the wage system is egalitarian insiders and entrants are equally paid , the .number of entrants is determined by Eq. 12 . Differentiating totally this equation with respect to L and p leads to: .The right-hand side is positive since Q L, K is concave. Being in the region .where n - n , we know by Eq. 12 that:D p Q n q L , K kn y rK.o e p Q n q L , K y s.o L e n q L n q Le e Then if kn ) rK, the left-hand side is positive. Otherwise, the LHS is negative.
Therefore, the impact of an increase of the output price on the number of entrants, in absence of two-tier contracts, depends on the importance of the cost of the capital. It will be negative if this cost is high, otherwise, positive.
B.1.3. The intermediate case If the firm is in the intermediate case and stays between these boundaries .according to the assumptions made, n or n and n or n an increase of theD C A B output price does not change the employment level. Indeed, employing all the insiders and hiring no outsider is still the optimal solution.
But the boundaries shift following an increase of the output price. Therefore, regime shifts can be observed. It can easily be seen that the boundaries, n , nA B and n , move to the right. Therefore, when a two-tier system prevails, if the initialC membership is higher than but sufficiently close to n , the firm increasesC .employment instead of a status quo . In a sufficiently small neighborhood of n A .respectively, n , the employment level is completely unresponsive to outputB .price increases. In the absence of a two-tier system, n instead of n is theD C relevant boundary. After an increase of the output price, n shifts to the left ifD kn - rK, otherwise, to the right. Therefore, under the assumption of an egalitarian wage system and for an initial membership lower than but sufficiently close to n ,D 200 the firm keeps employment unchanged or hires outsiders after an increase in the output price.
An important implication of this model is that the firm does not display a perverse supply behavior except in the case where n - n , insiders and entrantsD are equally paid and when kn - rK. In that case only, the firm hires less entrants when the output price increases. The intermediate zone is characterized by a status .quo in employment all insiders are employed and no outsiders enter the firm , the firm absorbing the shocks through income fluctuations. This was already noticed . .by Steinherr and Thisse 1979 and Spinnewyn and Svejnar 1990 .
B.2. The dynamic model . . .. Assuming that k s 0 hence. As above, assume that the value-added function is  where p is the price of the single output, K is the exogenous levele o .of the capital stock and Q L q L , K is the concave production functioni e .With k s 0, Eq. 18 that characterizes the steady state can be rewritten as U C r.
where, as before, C denotes the instantaneous compensation paid to the workers.
. .Totally differentiating Eqs. B4 and B5 with respect to C, p and n leads too . . U conditions which present similarities with Eqs. B1 and B2 . Let M denote q where C is defined by Eq. B5 . Contrary to M . U in Eq. B3 , M is not necessarily negative. Then, from the differentiation of Eqs.
. .B4 and B5 , it can be checked that:  .where Q, Q and Q are evaluated at . From Eq. 18 , the termL LL . U between braces on the LHS of Eq. B6 is negative. Therefore, if M is negative, .the steady-state size of membership hence, the level of employment increases with the output price. However, if MU is positive, no clear conclusion can be 21 Relaxing this assumption of zero cooperation costs leads to rather complicate expressions and an ambiguous net effect of the output price on the steady state employment level.
 201 ..drawn. It can easily be checked that  is the first-order derivative of the marginal rate of substitution of consumption for membership with respect to consumption. So, very negative values of MU are associated with . ..strongly concave instantaneous iso-utility curves ‘n t U C t s constant’.
Appendix C The first-order conditions for maximizing L call for  C2. C3.  C5.  C6. .
En In these expressions, w and w ' E , where L ,a has been defined in Eq. 15 . It is easily seen that , with a strict inequality if k ) 0.e Section 5 shows that in steady state all members are hired, outsiders enter the .firm to replace quits and are considered as members m s 1 . Hence, sufficiently 202 . .close to the steady state, equality C2 s 0 and expression C6 can be used to .rewrite the equation of motion as:˙ C7.
.Eq. C7 can be interpreted as follows. The shadow price of membership, g , .depreciates at the rate at which membership is contributing at the margin to the ..current objective of the PEF the first two terms on the RHS of Eq. C7 and to the enhancement of the value of membership the third term on the RHS of Eq.
.. .C7 . Discounting back motivates the last term on the RHS of Eq. C7 .
.Furthermore, Eq. which states that outsiders are hired until their marginal contribution to the current objective of the PEF and to its future one measured by the shadow price of . . .membership is zero. Since g s 0 in steady state, Eqs. C7 and C8 can be˙ combined and yield: U w n,qn,1 q nUX w n,qn,1 w n,qn,1. . .. . 1 q r q q nUX w n,qn,1 w n,qn,1 s 0. . .. 2 .After some manipulation, this equality leads to Eq. 18 .
.The dynamic behavior of system 15 will now be analyzed in a neighborhood . .of a steady state. Assume k s 0. Combined with Eq. C8 , the differential Eq. C7 becomes: Eq. where Y t is a compact notation for Y n t , L t , with Y Eq. . Linearizing Y and U around the steadye e . .state solution n, L allows to rewrite Eq. C9 as:Eq. . The L t s 0 locus is downward sloping. Fig. 2 gives the phase diagrame . . . . .corresponding to Eqs. C10 and 14 rewritten as Eq. arounde the steady state.
Up to now, we have neglected the transversality conditions. However, as the .current-value Lagrange multiplier g t and the current-value Hamiltonian con- verge towards finite values, it is easily checked that the transversality conditions are satisfied.